

# .NET MAUI Learning Resources

A repository filled with resources available to you to start learning .NET MAUI!

I have divided the content by type of content, so video, blogs, sample code, etc. so that you can find the content in the form that you prefer. In each of the subfolders you can find a list of resources that you can use to start learning or bolster your knowledge about .NET MAUI.

If you know about a website or resource you don't see on here yet, feel free to open a PR!

Happy learning!

## Resources

* Blogs: the amazing .NET MAUI community loves blogging about their learnings. Find their blog sites in here.
* Books: (e-)books written about .NET MAUI.
* Code: notable project or sample repositories with code that can be used for reference.
* Social Media: find all your social media influencers related to .NET MAUI here.
* Videos: YouTube channels, Twitch streamers, full courses, etc.
* Other: links that do not fit in any of the other sections. Think of newsletters and podcasts.

## Official Links

* .NET MAUI GitHub repository: the .NET MAUI GitHub repository where the project is actively developed.
* .NET MAUI Microsoft Docs: the official Microsoft documentation about .NET MAUI.
* .NET MAUI Learn Path: an interactive .NET MAUI course on the Microsoft Learn website with hands-on examples to start learning .NET MAUI.
* .NET MAUI Learn Live: 7 live streamed episodes where you can learn to build your first .NET MAUI app together with James Montemagno and Matthew Soucoup.

### Attribution

* Header image background: Color pencil photo created by creativeart - www.freepik.com.
